I HAD always thought Jack Gisburn rather a cheap genius--though a good fellow enough--so it was no great surprise to me to hear that, in the height of his glory, he had dropped his painting, married a rich widow, and established himself in a villa on the Riviera. (Though I rather thought it would have been Rome or Florence.)
"The height of his glory"--that was what the women called it. I can hear Mrs. Gideon Thwing--his last Chicago sitter--deploring his unaccountable abdication. "Of course it's going to send the value of my picture 'way up; but I don't think of that, Mr. Rickham--the loss to Arrt is all I think of." The word, on Mrs. Thwing's lips, multiplied its _rs_ as though they were reflected in an endless vista of mirrors. And it was not only the Mrs. Thwings who mourned. Had not the exquisite Hermia Croft, at the last Grafton Gallery show, stopped me before Gisburn's "Moon-dancers" to say, with tears in her eyes: "We shall not look upon its like again"?
Well!--even through the prism of Hermia's tears I felt able to face the fact with equanimity. Poor Jack Gisburn! The women had made him--it was fitting that they should mourn him. Among his own sex fewer regrets were heard, and in his own trade hardly a murmur. Professional jealousy? Perhaps. If it were, the honour of the craft was vindicated by little Claude Nutley, who, in all good faith, brought out in the Burlington a very handsome "obituary" on Jack--one of those showy articles stocked with random technicalities that I have heard (I won't say by whom) compared to Gisburn's painting. And so--his resolve being apparently irrevocable--the discussion gradually died out, and, as Mrs. Thwing had predicted, the price of "Gisburns" went up.
It was not till three years later that, in the course of a few weeks' idling on the Riviera, it suddenly occurred to me to wonder why Gisburn had given up his painting. On reflection, it really was a tempting problem. To accuse his wife would have been too easy--his fair sitters had been denied the solace of saying that Mrs. Gisburn had "dragged him down." For Mrs. Gisburn--as such--had not existed till nearly a year after Jack's resolve had been taken. It might be that he had married her--since he liked his ease--because he didn't want to go on painting; but it would have been hard to prove that he had given up his painting because he had married her.
Of course, if she had not dragged him down, she had equally, as Miss Croft contended, failed to "lift him up"--she had not led him back to the easel. To put the brush into his hand again--what a vocation for a wife! But Mrs. Gisburn appeared to have disdained it--and I felt it might be interesting to find out why.
The desultory life of the Riviera lends itself to such purely academic speculations; and having, on my way to Monte Carlo, caught a glimpse of Jack's balustraded terraces between the pines, I had myself borne thither the next day.
I found the couple at tea beneath their palm-trees; and Mrs. Gisburn's welcome was so genial that, in the ensuing weeks, I claimed it frequently. It was not that my hostess was "interesting": on that point I could have given Miss Croft the fullest reassurance. It was just because she was _not_ interesting--if I may be pardoned the bull--that I found her so. For Jack, all his life, had been surrounded by interesting women: they had fostered his art, it had been reared in the hot-house of their adulation. And it was therefore instructive to note what effect the "deadening atmosphere of mediocrity" (I quote Miss Croft) was having on him.
I have mentioned that Mrs. Gisburn was rich; and it was immediately perceptible that her husband was extracting from this circumstance a delicate but substantial satisfaction. It is, as a rule, the people who scorn money who get most out of it; and Jack's elegant disdain of his wife's big balance enabled him, with an appearance of perfect good-breeding, to transmute it into objects of art and luxury. To the latter, I must add, he remained relatively indifferent; but he was buying Renaissance bronzes and eighteenth-century pictures with a discrimination that bespoke the amplest resources.
"Money's only excuse is to put beauty into circulation," was one of the axioms he laid down across the Sevres and silver of an exquisitely appointed luncheon-table, when, on a later day, I had again run over from Monte Carlo; and Mrs. Gisburn, beaming on him, added for my enlightenment: "Jack is so morbidly sensitive to every form of beauty."
Poor Jack! It had always been his fate to have women say such things of him: the fact should be set down in extenuation. What struck me now was that, for the first time, he resented the tone. I had seen him, so often, basking under similar tributes--was it the conjugal note that robbed them of their savour? No--for, oddly enough, it became apparent that he was fond of Mrs. Gisburn--fond enough not to see her absurdity. It was his own absurdity he seemed to be wincing under--his own attitude as an object for garlands and incense.
"My dear, since I've chucked painting people don't say that stuff about me--they say it about Victor Grindle," was his only protest, as he rose from the table and strolled out onto the sunlit terrace.
I glanced after him, struck by his last word. Victor Grindle was, in fact, becoming the man of the moment--as Jack himself, one might put it, had been the man of the hour. The younger artist was said to have formed himself at my friend's feet, and I wondered if a tinge of jealousy underlay the latter's mysterious abdication. But no--for it was not till after that event that the _rose Dubarry_ drawing-rooms had begun to display their "Grindles."
I turned to Mrs. Gisburn, who had lingered to give a lump of sugar to her spaniel in the dining-room.
"Why _has_ he chucked painting?" I asked abruptly.
She raised her eyebrows with a hint of good-humoured surprise.
"Oh, he doesn't _have_ to now, you know; and I want him to enjoy himself," she said quite simply.
I looked about the spacious white-panelled room, with its _famille-verte_ vases repeating the tones of the pale damask curtains, and its eighteenth-century pastels in delicate faded frames.
"Has he chucked his pictures too? I haven't seen a single one in the house."
A slight shade of constraint crossed Mrs. Gisburn's open countenance. "It's his ridiculous modesty, you know. He says they're not fit to have about; he's sent them all away except one--my portrait--and that I have to keep upstairs."
His ridiculous modesty--Jack's modesty about his pictures? My curiosity was growing like the bean-stalk. I said persuasively to my hostess: "I must really see your portrait, you know."
She glanced out almost timorously at the terrace where her husband, lounging in a hooded chair, had lit a cigar and drawn the Russian deerhound's head between his knees.
"Well, come while he's not looking," she said, with a laugh that tried to hide her nervousness; and I followed her between the marble Emperors of the hall, and up the wide stairs with terra-cotta nymphs poised among flowers at each landing.
In the dimmest corner of her boudoir, amid a profusion of delicate and distinguished objects, hung one of the familiar oval canvases, in the inevitable garlanded frame. The mere outline of the frame called up all Gisburn's past!
Mrs. Gisburn drew back the window-curtains, moved aside a _jardiniere_ full of pink azaleas, pushed an arm-chair away, and said: "If you stand here you can just manage to see it. I had it over the mantel-piece, but he wouldn't let it stay."
Yes--I could just manage to see it--the first portrait of Jack's I had ever had to strain my eyes over! Usually they had the place of honour--say the central panel in a pale yellow or _rose Dubarry_ drawing-room, or a monumental easel placed so that it took the light through curtains of old Venetian point. The more modest place became the picture better; yet, as my eyes grew accustomed to the half-light, all the characteristic qualities came out--all the hesitations disguised as audacities, the tricks of prestidigitation by which, with such consummate skill, he managed to divert attention from the real business of the picture to some pretty irrelevance of detail. Mrs. Gisburn, presenting a neutral surface to work on--forming, as it were, so inevitably the background of her own picture--had lent herself in an unusual degree to the display of this false virtuosity. The picture was one of Jack's "strongest," as his admirers would have put it--it represented, on his part, a swelling of muscles, a congesting of veins, a balancing, straddling and straining, that reminded one of the circus-clown's ironic efforts to lift a feather. It met, in short, at every point the demand of lovely woman to be painted "strongly" because she was tired of being painted "sweetly"--and yet not to lose an atom of the sweetness.
"It's the last he painted, you know," Mrs. Gisburn said with pardonable pride. "The last but one," she corrected herself--"but the other doesn't count, because he destroyed it."
"Destroyed it?" I was about to follow up this clue when I heard a footstep and saw Jack himself on the threshold.
As he stood there, his hands in the pockets of his velveteen coat, the thin brown waves of hair pushed back from his white forehead, his lean sunburnt cheeks furrowed by a smile that lifted the tips of a self-confident moustache, I felt to what a degree he had the same quality as his pictures--the quality of looking cleverer than he was.
His wife glanced at him deprecatingly, but his eyes travelled past her to the portrait.
"Mr. Rickham wanted to see it," she began, as if excusing herself. He shrugged his shoulders, still smiling.
"Oh, Rickham found me out long ago," he said lightly; then, passing his arm through mine: "Come and see the rest of the house."
He showed it to me with a kind of naive suburban pride: the bath-rooms, the speaking-tubes, the dress-closets, the trouser-presses--all the complex simplifications of the millionaire's domestic economy. And whenever my wonder paid the expected tribute he said, throwing out his chest a little: "Yes, I really don't see how people manage to live without that."
Well--it was just the end one might have foreseen for him. Only he was, through it all and in spite of it all--as he had been through, and in spite of, his pictures--so handsome, so charming, so disarming, that one longed to cry out: "Be dissatisfied with your leisure!" as once one had longed to say: "Be dissatisfied with your work!"
But, with the cry on my lips, my diagnosis suffered an unexpected check.
"This is my own lair," he said, leading me into a dark plain room at the end of the florid vista. It was square and brown and leathery: no "effects"; no bric-a-brac, none of the air of posing for reproduction in a picture weekly--above all, no least sign of ever having been used as a studio.
The fact brought home to me the absolute finality of Jack's break with his old life.
"Don't you ever dabble with paint any more?" I asked, still looking about for a trace of such activity.
"Never," he said briefly.
"Or water-colour--or etching?"
His confident eyes grew dim, and his cheeks paled a little under their handsome sunburn.
"Never think of it, my dear fellow--any more than if I'd never touched a brush."
And his tone told me in a flash that he never thought of anything else.
I moved away, instinctively embarrassed by my unexpected discovery; and as I turned, my eye fell on a small picture above the mantel-piece--the only object breaking the plain oak panelling of the room.
"Oh, by Jove!" I said.
It was a sketch of a donkey--an old tired donkey, standing in the rain under a wall.
"By Jove--a Stroud!" I cried.
He was silent; but I felt him close behind me, breathing a little quickly.
"What a wonder! Made with a dozen lines--but on everlasting foundations. You lucky chap, where did you get it?"
He answered slowly: "Mrs. Stroud gave it to me."
"Ah--I didn't know you even knew the Strouds. He was such an inflexible hermit."
"I didn't--till after. . . . She sent for me to paint him when he was dead."
"When he was dead? You?"
I must have let a little too much amazement escape through my surprise, for he answered with a deprecating laugh: "Yes--she's an awful simpleton, you know, Mrs. Stroud. Her only idea was to have him done by a fashionable painter--ah, poor Stroud! She thought it the surest way of proclaiming his greatness--of forcing it on a purblind public. And at the moment I was _the_ fashionable painter."
"Ah, poor Stroud--as you say. Was _that_ his history?"
"That was his history. She believed in him, gloried in him--or thought she did. But she couldn't bear not to have all the drawing-rooms with her. She couldn't bear the fact that, on varnishing days, one could always get near enough to see his pictures. Poor woman! She's just a fragment groping for other fragments. Stroud is the only whole I ever knew."
"You ever knew? But you just said--"
Gisburn had a curious smile in his eyes.
"Oh, I knew him, and he knew me--only it happened after he was dead."
I dropped my voice instinctively. "When she sent for you?"
"Yes--quite insensible to the irony. She wanted him vindicated--and by me!"
He laughed again, and threw back his head to look up at the sketch of the donkey. "There were days when I couldn't look at that thing--couldn't face it. But I forced myself to put it here; and now it's cured me--cured me. That's the reason why I don't dabble any more, my dear Rickham; or rather Stroud himself is the reason."
For the first time my idle curiosity about my companion turned into a serious desire to understand him better.
"I wish you'd tell me how it happened," I said.
He stood looking up at the sketch, and twirling between his fingers a cigarette he had forgotten to light. Suddenly he turned toward me.
"I'd rather like to tell you--because I've always suspected you of loathing my work."
I made a deprecating gesture, which he negatived with a good-humoured shrug.
"Oh, I didn't care a straw when I believed in myself--and now it's an added tie between us!"
He laughed slightly, without bitterness, and pushed one of the deep arm-chairs forward. "There: make yourself comfortable--and here are the cigars you like."
He placed them at my elbow and continued to wander up and down the room, stopping now and then beneath the picture.
"How it happened? I can tell you in five minutes--and it didn't take much longer to happen. . . . I can remember now how surprised and pleased I was when I got Mrs. Stroud's note. Of course, deep down, I had always _felt_ there was no one like him--only I had gone with the stream, echoed the usual platitudes about him, till I half got to think he was a failure, one of the kind that are left behind. By Jove, and he _was_ left behind--because he had come to stay! The rest of us had to let ourselves be swept along or go under, but he was high above the current--on everlasting foundations, as you say.
"Well, I went off to the house in my most egregious mood--rather moved, Lord forgive me, at the pathos of poor Stroud's career of failure being crowned by the glory of my painting him! Of course I meant to do the picture for nothing--I told Mrs. Stroud so when she began to stammer something about her poverty. I remember getting off a prodigious phrase about the honour being _mine_--oh, I was princely, my dear Rickham! I was posing to myself like one of my own sitters.
"Then I was taken up and left alone with him. I had sent all my traps in advance, and I had only to set up the easel and get to work. He had been dead only twenty-four hours, and he died suddenly, of heart disease, so that there had been no preliminary work of destruction--his face was clear and untouched. I had met him once or twice, years before, and thought him insignificant and dingy. Now I saw that he was superb.
"I was glad at first, with a merely aesthetic satisfaction: glad to have my hand on such a 'subject.' Then his strange life-likeness began to affect me queerly--as I blocked the head in I felt as if he were watching me do it. The sensation was followed by the thought: if he _were_ watching me, what would he say to my way of working? My strokes began to go a little wild--I felt nervous and uncertain.
"Once, when I looked up, I seemed to see a smile behind his close grayish beard--as if he had the secret, and were amusing himself by holding it back from me. That exasperated me still more. The secret? Why, I had a secret worth twenty of his! I dashed at the canvas furiously, and tried some of my bravura tricks. But they failed me, they crumbled. I saw that he wasn't watching the showy bits--I couldn't distract his attention; he just kept his eyes on the hard passages between. Those were the ones I had always shirked, or covered up with some lying paint. And how he saw through my lies!
"I looked up again, and caught sight of that sketch of the donkey hanging on the wall near his bed. His wife told me afterward it was the last thing he had done--just a note taken with a shaking hand, when he was down in Devonshire recovering from a previous heart attack. Just a note! But it tells his whole history. There are years of patient scornful persistence in every line. A man who had swum with the current could never have learned that mighty up-stream stroke. . . .
"I turned back to my work, and went on groping and muddling; then I looked at the donkey again. I saw that, when Stroud laid in the first stroke, he knew just what the end would be. He had possessed his subject, absorbed it, recreated it. When had I done that with any of my things? They hadn't been born of me--I had just adopted them. . . .
"Hang it, Rickham, with that face watching me I couldn't do another stroke. The plain truth was, I didn't know where to put it--_I had never known_. Only, with my sitters and my public, a showy splash of colour covered up the fact--I just threw paint into their faces. . . . Well, paint was the one medium those dead eyes could see through--see straight to the tottering foundations underneath. Don't you know how, in talking a foreign language, even fluently, one says half the time not what one wants to but what one can? Well--that was the way I painted; and as he lay there and watched me, the thing they called my 'technique' collapsed like a house of cards. He didn't sneer, you understand, poor Stroud--he just lay there quietly watching, and on his lips, through the gray beard, I seemed to hear the question: 'Are you sure you know where you're coming out?'
"If I could have painted that face, with that question on it, I should have done a great thing. The next greatest thing was to see that I couldn't--and that grace was given me. But, oh, at that minute, Rickham, was there anything on earth I wouldn't have given to have Stroud alive before me, and to hear him say: 'It's not too late--I'll show you how'?
"It _was_ too late--it would have been, even if he'd been alive. I packed up my traps, and went down and told Mrs. Stroud. Of course I didn't tell her _that_--it would have been Greek to her. I simply said I couldn't paint him, that I was too moved. She rather liked the idea--she's so romantic! It was that that made her give me the donkey. But she was terribly upset at not getting the portrait--she did so want him 'done' by some one showy! At first I was afraid she wouldn't let me off--and at my wits' end I suggested Grindle. Yes, it was I who started Grindle: I told Mrs. Stroud he was the 'coming' man, and she told somebody else, and so it got to be true. . . . And he painted Stroud without wincing; and she hung the picture among her husband's things. . . ."
He flung himself down in the arm-chair near mine, laid back his head, and clasping his arms beneath it, looked up at the picture above the chimney-piece.
"I like to fancy that Stroud himself would have given it to me, if he'd been able to say what he thought that day."
And, in answer to a question I put half-mechanically--"Begin again?" he flashed out. "When the one thing that brings me anywhere near him is that I knew enough to leave off?"
He stood up and laid his hand on my shoulder with a laugh. "Only the irony of it is that I _am_ still painting--since Grindle's doing it for me! The Strouds stand alone, and happen once--but there's no exterminating our kind of art."
Introduction
The Time Traveller (for so it will be convenient to speak of him)
was expounding a recondite matter to us. His pale grey eyes
shone and twinkled, and his usually pale face was flushed and
animated. The fire burnt brightly, and the soft radiance of the
incandescent lights in the lilies of silver caught the bubbles that
flashed and passed in our glasses. Our chairs, being his patents,
embraced and caressed us rather than submitted to be sat
upon, and there was that luxurious after-dinner atmosphere,
when thought runs gracefully free of the trammels of precision.
And he put it to us in this way—marking the points with a lean
forefinger—as we sat and lazily admired his earnestness over
this new paradox (as we thought it) and his fecundity.
“You must follow me carefully. I shall have to controvert one or
two ideas that are almost universally accepted. The geometry,
for instance, they taught you at school is founded on a
misconception.”
“Is not that rather a large thing to expect us to begin upon?”
said Filby, an argumentative person with red hair.
“I do not mean to ask you to accept anything without
reasonable ground for it. You will soon admit as much as I need
4
from you. You know of course that a mathematical line, a line of
thickness nil, has no real existence. They taught you that?
Neither has a mathematical plane. These things are mere
abstractions.”
“That is all right,” said the Psychologist.
“Nor, having only length, breadth, and thickness, can a cube
have a real existence.”
“There I object,” said Filby. “Of course a solid body may exist.
All real things—
”
“So most people think. But wait a moment. Can an
instantaneous cube exist?”
“Don’t follow you,” said Filby.
“Can a cube that does not last for any time at all, have a real
existence?”
Filby became pensive. “Clearly,” the Time Traveller proceeded,
“any real body must have extension in four directions: it must
have Length, Breadth, Thickness, and—Duration. But through a
natural infirmity of the flesh, which I will explain to you in a
moment, we incline to overlook this fact. There are
really four dimensions, three which we call the three planes of
Space, and a fourth, Time. There is, however, a tendency to
draw an unreal distinction between the former three dimensions
and the latter, because it happens that our consciousness
5
moves intermittently in one direction along the latter from the
beginning to the end of our lives.”
“That,” said a very young man, making spasmodic efforts to
relight his cigar over the lamp; “that . . . very clear indeed.”
“Now, it is very remarkable that this is so extensively
overlooked,” continued the Time Traveller, with a slight
accession of cheerfulness. “Really this is what is meant by the
Fourth Dimension, though some people who talk about the
Fourth Dimension do not know they mean it. It is only another
way of looking at Time. There is no difference between Time
and any of the three dimensions of Space except that our
consciousness moves along it. But some foolish people have got
hold of the wrong side of that idea. You have all heard what
they have to say about this Fourth Dimension?”
“I have not,” said the Provincial Mayor.
“It is simply this. That Space, as our mathematicians have it, is
spoken of as having three dimensions, which one may call
Length, Breadth, and Thickness, and is always definable by
reference to three planes, each at right angles to the others. But
some philosophical people have been asking why three
dimensions particularly—why not another direction at right
angles to the other three?—and have even tried to construct a
Four-Dimensional geometry. Professor Simon Newcomb was
expounding this to the New York Mathematical Society only a
month or so ago. You know how on a flat surface, which has
6
only two dimensions, we can represent a figure of a three-
dimensional solid, and similarly they think that by models of
three dimensions they could represent one of four—if they could
master the perspective of the thing. See?”
“I think so,” murmured the Provincial Mayor; and, knitting his
brows, he lapsed into an introspective state, his lips moving as
one who repeats mystic words. “Yes, I think I see it now,” he
said after some time, brightening in a quite transitory manner.
“Well, I do not mind telling you I have been at work upon this
geometry of Four Dimensions for some time. Some of my
results are curious. For instance, here is a portrait of a man at
eight years old, another at fifteen, another at seventeen,
another at twenty-three, and so on. All these are evidently
sections, as it were, Three-Dimensional representations of his
Four-Dimensioned being, which is a fixed and unalterable thing.
“Scientific people,” proceeded the Time Traveller, after the
pause required
for the proper assimilation of this, “know very well that Time is
only a kind of Space. Here is a popular scientific diagram, a
weather record. This line I trace with my finger shows the
movement of the barometer. Yesterday it was so high,
yesterday night it fell, then this morning it rose again, and so
gently upward to here. Surely the mercury did not trace this line
in any of the dimensions of Space generally recognised? But
7
certainly it traced such a line, and that line, therefore, we must
conclude, was along the Time-Dimension.”
“But,” said the Medical Man, staring hard at a coal in the fire, “if
Time is really only a fourth dimension of Space, why is it, and
why has it always been, regarded as something different? And
why cannot we move in Time as we move about in the other
dimensions of Space?”
The Time Traveller smiled. “Are you so sure we can move freely
in Space? Right and left we can go, backward and forward
freely enough, and men always have done so. I admit we move
freely in two dimensions. But how about up and down?
Gravitation limits us there.”
“Not exactly,” said the Medical Man. “There are balloons.”
“But before the balloons, save for spasmodic jumping and the
inequalities of the surface, man had no freedom of vertical
movement.”
“Still they could move a little up and down,” said the Medical
Man. “Easier, far easier down than up.”
“And you cannot move at all in Time, you cannot get away from
the present moment.”
“My dear sir, that is just where you are wrong. That is just where
the whole world has gone wrong. We are always getting away
from the present moment. Our mental existences, which are
immaterial and have no dimensions, are passing along the
8
Time-Dimension with a uniform velocity from the cradle to the
grave. Just as we should travel down if we began our existence
fifty miles above the earth’s surface.”
“But the great difficulty is this,” interrupted the Psychologist.
’You can move about in all directions of Space, but you cannot
move about in Time.”
“That is the germ of my great discovery. But you are wrong to
say that we cannot move about in Time. For instance, if I am
recalling an incident very vividly I go back to the instant of its
occurrence: I become absent-minded, as you say. I jump back
for a moment. Of course we have no means of staying back for
any length of Time, any more than a savage or an animal has of
staying six feet above the ground. But a civilised man is better
off than the savage in this respect. He can go up against
gravitation in a balloon, and why should he not hope that
ultimately he may be able to stop or accelerate his drift
along the Time-Dimension, or even turn about and travel the
other way?” “Oh, this,” began Filby, “is all—
”
“Why not?” said the Time Traveller. “It’s against reason,” said
Filby.
“What reason?” said the Time Traveller.
“You can show black is white by argument,” said Filby, “but you
will never convince me.”
9
“Possibly not,” said the Time Traveller. “But now you begin to
see the object of my investigations into the geometry of Four
Dimensions. Long ago I had a vague inkling of a machine—
”
“To travel through Time!” exclaimed the Very Young Man.
“That shall travel indifferently in any direction of Space and
Time, as the driver determines.”
Filby contented himself with laughter.
“But I have experimental verification,” said the Time Traveller.
“It would be remarkably convenient for the historian,” the
Psychologist suggested. “One might travel back and verify the
accepted account of the Battle of Hastings, for instance!”
“Don’t you think you would attract attention?” said the Medical
Man. “Our ancestors had no great tolerance for anachronisms.”
“One might get one’s Greek from the very lips of Homer and
Plato,” the Very Young Man thought.
“In which case they would certainly plough you for the Little-go.
The German scholars have improved Greek so much.”
“Then there is the future,” said the Very Young Man. “Just think!
One might invest all one’s money, leave it to accumulate at
interest, and hurry on ahead!”
“To discover a society,” said I, “erected on a strictly
communistic basis.” “Of all the wild extravagant theories!”
began the Psychologist.
10
“Yes, so it seemed to me, and so I never talked of it until—”
“Experimental verification!” cried I. “You are going to verify
that?” “The experiment!” cried Filby, who was getting brain-
weary.
“Let’s see your experiment anyhow,” said the Psychologist,
“though it’s all
humbug, you know.”
The Time Traveller smiled round at us. Then, still smiling faintly,
and with his hands deep in his trousers pockets, he walked
slowly out of the room, and we heard his slippers shuffling down
the long passage to his laboratory.
The Psychologist looked at us. “I wonder what he’s got?”
“Some sleight-of-hand trick or other,” said the Medical Man,
and Filby tried to tell us about a conjuror he had seen at
Burslem, but before he had finished his preface the Time
Traveller came back, and Filby’s anecdote collapsed.
11
C H A P T E R II
The Machine
The thing the Time Traveller held in his hand was a glittering
metallic framework, scarcely larger than a small clock, and very
delicately made. There was ivory in it, and some transparent
crystalline substance. And now I must be explicit, for this that
follows—unless his explanation is to be accepted—is an
absolutely unaccountable thing. He took one of the small
octagonal tables that were scattered about the room, and set it
in front of the fire, with two legs on the hearthrug. On this table
he placed the mechanism. Then he drew up a chair, and sat
down. The only other object on the table was a small shaded
lamp, the bright light of which fell upon the model. There were
also perhaps a dozen candles about, two in brass candlesticks
upon the mantel and several in sconces, so that the room was
brilliantly illuminated. I sat in a low arm-chair nearest the fire,
and I drew this forward so as to be almost between the Time
Traveller and the fireplace. Filby sat behind him, looking over his
shoulder. The Medical Man and the Provincial Mayor watched
him in profile from the right, the Psychologist from the left. The
Very Young Man stood behind the Psychologist. We were all on
the alert. It appears incredible to me that any kind of trick,
12
however subtly conceived and however adroitly done, could
have been played upon us under these conditions.
The Time Traveller looked at us, and then at the mechanism.
“Well?” said the Psychologist.
“This little affair,” said the Time Traveller, resting his elbows
upon the table and pressing his hands together above the
apparatus, “is only a model. It is my plan for a machine to
travel through time. You will notice that it looks singularly
askew, and that there is an odd twinkling appearance about
this bar, as though it was in some way unreal.” He pointed to
the part with his finger.
“Also, here is one little white lever, and here is another.”
The Medical Man got up out of his chair and peered into the
thing. “It’s beautifully made,” he said.
“It took two years to make,” retorted the Time Traveller. Then,
when we had all imitated the action of the Medical Man, he said:
“Now I want you clearly to understand that this lever, being
pressed over, sends the machine gliding into the future, and this
other reverses the motion. This saddle represents the seat of a
time traveller. Presently I am going to press the lever, and off
the machine will go. It will vanish, pass into future Time, and
disappear. Have a good look at the thing. Look at the table too,
and satisfy yourselves there is no trickery. I don’t want to waste
this model, and then be told I’m a quack.”
13
There was a minute’s pause perhaps. The Psychologist seemed
about to speak to me, but changed his mind. Then the Time
Traveller put forth his finger towards the lever. “No,” he said
suddenly. “Lend me your hand.” And turning to the Psychologist,
he took that individual’s hand in his own and told him to put out
his forefinger. So that it was the Psychologist himself who sent
forth the model Time Machine on its interminable voyage. We all
saw the lever turn. I am absolutely certain there was no trickery.
There was a breath of wind, and the lamp flame jumped. One of
the candles on the mantel was blown out, and the little machine
suddenly swung round, became indistinct, was seen as a ghost
for a second perhaps, as an eddy of faintly glittering brass and
ivory; and it was gone—vanished! Save for the lamp the table
was bare.
Everyone was silent for a minute. Then Filby said he was
damned.
The Psychologist recovered from his stupor, and suddenly
looked under the table. At that the Time Traveller laughed
cheerfully. “Well?” he said, with a reminiscence of the
Psychologist. Then, getting up, he went to the tobacco jar on the
mantel, and with his back to us began to fill his pipe.
We stared at each other. “Look here,” said the Medical Man,
“are you in earnest about this? Do you seriously believe that
that machine has travelled into time?”
14
“Certainly,” said the Time Traveller, stooping to light a spill at
the fire. Then he turned, lighting his pipe, to look at the
Psychologist’s face. (The Psychologist, to show that he was not
unhinged, helped himself to a cigar and tried to light it uncut.)
“What is more, I have a big machine nearly finished in there”—
he indicated the laboratory—“and when that is put together I
mean to have a journey on my own account.”
“You mean to say that that machine has travelled into the
future?” said Filby.
“Into the future or the past—I don’t, for certain, know which.”
After an interval the Psychologist had an inspiration. “It must
have gone into the past if it has gone anywhere,” he said.
“Why?” said the Time Traveller.
“Because I presume that it has not moved in space, and if it
travelled into the future it would still be here all this time, since it
must have travelled through this time.”
“But,” said I, “If it travelled into the past it would have been
visible when we came first into this room; and last Thursday
when we were here; and the Thursday before that; and so forth!”
“Serious objections,” remarked the Provincial Mayor, with an air
of impartiality, turning towards the Time Traveller.
15
“Not a bit,” said the Time Traveller, and, to the Psychologist:
“You think. You can explain that. It’s presentation below the
threshold, you know, diluted presentation.”
“Of course,” said the Psychologist, and reassured us. “That’s a
simple point of psychology. I should have thought of it. It’s
plain enough, and helps the paradox delightfully. We cannot see
it, nor can we appreciate this machine, any more than we can
the spoke of a wheel spinning, or a bullet flying through the air.
If it is travelling through time fifty times or a hundred times
faster than we are, if it gets through a minute while we get
through a second, the impression it creates will of course be
only one-fiftieth or one-hundredth of what it would make if it
were not travelling in time. That’s plain enough.” He passed his
hand through the space in which the machine had been. “You
see?” he said, laughing.
We sat and stared at the vacant table for a minute or so. Then
the Time Traveller asked us what we thought of it all.
“It sounds plausible enough tonight,” said the Medical Man; “but
wait until tomorrow. Wait for the common sense of the
morning.”
“Would you like to see the Time Machine itself?” asked the Time
Traveller. And therewith, taking the lamp in his hand, he led the
way down the long, draughty corridor to his laboratory. I
remember vividly the flickering light, his queer, broad head in
silhouette, the dance of the shadows, how we all followed him,
16
puzzled but incredulous, and how there in the laboratory we
beheld a larger edition of the little mechanism which we had
seen vanish from before our eyes. Parts were of nickel, parts of
ivory, parts had certainly been filed or sawn out of rock crystal.
The thing was generally complete, but the twisted crystalline
bars lay unfinished upon the bench beside some sheets of
drawings, and I took one up for a better look at it. Quartz it
seemed to be.
“Look here,” said the Medical Man, “are you perfectly serious?
Or is this a trick—like that ghost you showed us last Christmas?”
“Upon that machine,” said the Time Traveller, holding the lamp
aloft, “I intend to explore time. Is that plain? I was never more
serious in my life.”
None of us quite knew how to take it.
I caught Filby’s eye over the shoulder of the Medical Man, and
he winked at me solemnly.
17
C H A P T E R III
The Time Traveller Returns
I think that at that time none of us quite believed in the Time
Machine. The fact is, the Time Traveller was one of those men
who are too clever to be believed: you never felt that you saw all
round him; you always suspected some subtle reserve, some
ingenuity in ambush, behind his lucid frankness. Had Filby
shown the model and explained the matter in the Time
Traveller’s words, we should have shown him far less scepticism.
For we should have perceived his motives: a pork-butcher could
understand Filby. But the Time Traveller had more than a touch
of whim among his elements, and we distrusted him. Things that
would have made the fame of a less clever man seemed tricks
in his hands. It is a mistake to do things too easily. The serious
people who took him seriously never felt quite sure of his
deportment; they were somehow aware that trusting their
reputations for judgment with him was like furnishing a nursery
with eggshell china. So I don’t think any of us said very much
about time travelling in the interval between that Thursday and
the next, though its odd potentialities ran, no doubt, in most of
our minds: its plausibility, that is, its practical incredibleness, the
curious possibilities of anachronism and of utter confusion it
suggested. For my own part, I was particularly preoccupied
18
with the trick of the model. That I remember discussing with the
Medical Man, whom I met on Friday at the Linnæan. He said he
had seen a similar thing at Tübingen, and laid considerable
stress on the blowing-out of the candle. But how the trick was
done he could not explain.
The next Thursday I went again to Richmond—I suppose I was
one of the Time Traveller’s most constant guests—and, arriving
late, found four or five men already assembled in his drawing-
room. The Medical Man was standing before the fire with a
sheet of paper in one hand and his watch in the other. I
looked round for the Time Traveller, and—“It’s half-past seven
now,” said the Medical Man. “I suppose we’d better have
dinner?”
“Where’s——?” said I, naming our host.
“You’ve just come? It’s rather odd. He’s unavoidably detained.
He asks me in this note to lead off with dinner at seven if he’s
not back. Says he’ll explain when he comes.”
“It seems a pity to let the dinner spoil,” said the Editor of a well-
known daily paper; and thereupon the Doctor rang the bell.
The Psychologist was the only person besides the Doctor and
myself who had attended the previous dinner. The other men
were Blank, the Editor aforementioned, a certain journalist, and
another—a quiet, shy man with a beard—whom I didn’t know,
19
and who, as far as my observation went, never opened his
mouth all the evening. There was some speculation at the
dinner- table about the Time Traveller’s absence, and I
suggested time travelling, in a half-jocular spirit. The Editor
wanted that explained to him, and the Psychologist volunteered
a wooden account of the “ingenious paradox and trick” we had
witnessed that day week. He was in the midst of his exposition
when the door from the corridor opened slowly and without
noise. I was facing the door, and saw it first. “Hallo!” I said. “At
last!” And the door opened wider, and the Time Traveller stood
before us. I gave a cry of surprise. “Good heavens! man, what’s
the matter?” cried the Medical Man, who saw him next. And the
whole tableful turned towards the door.
He was in an amazing plight. His coat was dusty and dirty, and
smeared with green down the sleeves; his hair disordered, and
as it seemed to me greyer—either with dust and dirt or because
its colour had actually faded. His face was ghastly pale; his chin
had a brown cut on it—a cut half-healed; his expression was
haggard and drawn, as by intense suffering. For a moment he
hesitated in the doorway, as if he had been dazzled by the light.
Then he came into the room. He walked with just such a limp as
I have seen in footsore tramps. We stared at him in silence,
expecting him to speak.
He said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and made a
motion towards the wine. The Editor filled a glass of
champagne, and pushed it towards him. He drained it, and it
20
seemed to do him good: for he looked round the table, and the
ghost of his old smile flickered across his face. “What on earth
have you been up to, man?” said the Doctor. The Time Traveller
did not seem to hear. “Don’t let me disturb you,” he said, with a
certain faltering articulation. “I’m all right.” He stopped, held out
his glass for more, and took it off at a draught. “That’s good,”
he said. His eyes grew brighter, and a faint colour came into his
cheeks. His glance flickered over our faces with a certain dull
approval, and then went round the warm and comfortable
room. Then he
spoke again, still as it were feeling his way among his words.
“I’m going to wash and dress, and then I’ll come down and
explain things.... Save me some of that mutton. I’m starving for
a bit of meat.”
He looked across at the Editor, who was a rare visitor, and
hoped he was all right. The Editor began a question. “Tell you
presently,” said the Time Traveller. “I’m—funny! Be all right in a
minute.”
He put down his glass, and walked towards the staircase door.
Again I remarked his lameness and the soft padding sound of
his footfall, and standing up in my place, I saw his feet as he
went out. He had nothing on them but a pair of tattered, blood-
stained socks. Then the door closed upon him. I had half a mind
to follow, till I remembered how he detested any fuss about
21
himself. For a minute, perhaps, my mind was wool-gathering.
Then, “Remarkable Behaviour of an Eminent Scientist,” I heard
the Editor say, thinking (after his wont) in headlines. And this
brought my attention back to the bright dinner- table.
“What’s the game?” said the Journalist. “Has he been doing the
Amateur Cadger? I don’t follow.” I met the eye of the
Psychologist, and read my own interpretation in his face. I
thought of the Time Traveller limping painfully upstairs. I d